VPN:
- creates a private network over the internet
- Encrypting all the transmissions
- Fornece acesso e segurança
- Modens a cabo, dispositivos celulares, e etc não são seguros. Enviam e recebem dados não criptografados, 
o que faz com que qualquer pessoa intercepte e visualize os dados trocados. A VPN provides an answer to these issues.

VPN Protocols:
Encryption need of a VPN. Using certain network protocols. 
Exist 2 protocols for achieve the encryption needs of a VPN:
	Where data is encapsulated is referred to as the tunnel.
	
	- PPTP(Point-to-Point Tunnelling Protocol):
	enable the PPP to have its packets encapsulated within IP packets and forwarded over any IP network, including the Internet itself.
	Less secure than L2TP or IPsec, but it is a secure extension to PPP.
	Operates at layer 2 of the OSI model
	Encrypting the data transmissions
	No encryption
	To authenticate the user, there are two technologies:
	-EAP: provides a framework which includes a variety of authentication methods to be used(passwords, tokens, public key)
	- CHAP: Handshaking. Repet the process. Even after a client connection is authenticated, CHAP repeatdly seeks to 
	re-authenticate that client, providing a robust level of security

	- L2TP(Layer 2 Tunneling Protocol):
	Combined with IPSec to achieve a high level of security
	Improve of PPTP protocol. 
	Data link layer (2) of the OSI model
	Less secure than IPsec
	L2TP and IPSec can be used together.
	Supports EAP and CHAP and others like:
	- MS-CHAP: Microsoft extension to CHAP. Compatible with Microsoft Windows. 
	- PAP: basic form of authentication. allow a user's name and password to be transmitted over the network and compared to a table of name-password
	pairs.Built into the HTTP protocol. The password in the table are encrypeted but the trasmission of the password is not, because it is in clear text. 
	- SPAP: More secure than PAP. Username and password encrypted when they are sent. Susceptible to playback attack(replay attack: Transmissão de dados valida é repetida ou atrasada de maneira fradulenta). This is
	possible because SPAP uses the same reversible encryption method to send the passwords over the wire.
	- Kerberos: The actual password is never sent. Impossible to intercept because of it. The username is sent , and then the server looks up to the stored hash of that password.
	Authentication happens with UDP on port 88.

	-IPSec: Used in addition to the IP protocol that adds privacy to TCP/IP communication.Ta presente no Windows e outros SO.
	Existem 2 tipos de encriptação: Transport(encripta o dado de cada pacote porem deixa o header o qual tem o source e o destino sem criptografia) e o Tunnel(Que encripta tanto o dado quanto o header(Mais lento)))
	Single-key encryption technology.
		Provides 2 protocols:
			Authentication Header(AH): only mechanism for authentication
			Encapsulating: Data confidentiality and Authentication
	
SSL/TLS:
Novo tipo de firewall usa SSL(Secure Sockets Layer) ou TLS(Transport Layer Security) para prover o acesso a VPN por uma aplicação web.
Se um site usa SSL ou TLS não quer dizer que vc ta usando VPN. SSL em sites que não usa VPN servem por exemplo para você acessar seus dados bancarios.


Pode ser interessante ter uma VPN dedicada para conexões maiores 

Openswan - open source VPN to linux (do not support NAT)
	